Rethinking the Sidenote
=======================

The canvas of the web presents an enormous opportunity to enrich online text with ancillary images, figures, references, marginalia, links, and other interactive elements.  This freedom, however, must be met with caution; readability and reader focus can be interrupted by an oversaturation of extraneous content.  This experiment aims to explore such a balance by rethinking the interactive sidenote in the context of an online art essay.  I will also touch on a few related issues: interactive aesthetic, and guessing user intention.  The demo accompanying this blog post can be found here.

The inspiration for this project came about as I was reviewing notes from a survey course on Modern Art.  I wanted an interactive version of my notes, in which quotes, artists, and pieces of artwork could somehow be expanded to reveal extra information.  Edward Tufte's extensive use of sidenotes was a print precedent for this kind of extratextual elaboration.[[]]  Thus, I set out to rethink the sidenote in an online context.  As source text, I used an excerpt from a critical art essay because it was rich with references and figures.

References
----------

It never made sense to me that references in online content were pushed to the bottom of the page.[[]]  Interacting with a reference in the middle of reading usually requires a click to jump to the bottom of the page to view the target, and then a second click to return to where you left off.  The advent of the mobile web seems to have triggered a rethinking of references on at least some websites.  The mobile version of Wikipedia, for example, displays content in a hovering text bubble at the site of the inline citation.[[]]  Given that I also wanted to display images (artwork, in this case) in the margin of the source content, it felt natural to display the content of references in the margin too--just as Tufte does.[[]]  However, in a piece as rich with references and figures as the example art essay, there was simply no room in the margin to display everything.  Even if all ancillary information fit in the margin, a crowded margin would have distracted from the importance of the main text.

Hover
-----

I decided on hover as a natural action to reveal the contents of an inline citation for references and figures.  Unfortunately, hover effects can be extremely distracting if triggered unintentionally.  This is problematic if the hover triggers are inline citations, since many users track their reading progress with their mouse.[[]]  Therefore, I added a timeout to the hover event which ensures that the effect is triggered only after 500ms--a span of time both long enough to be reasonably sure that the mouse position is intentional and short enough so as not to appear laggy.  Moreover all content in the margin fades in and out when appropriate so as not to be jarring.  Compare the distraction level before and after the hover refinements.

User Intention
--------------

The second problem with hover only becomes apparent once an element of interactivity is added to the content revealed by the trigger.  There is simply no way to move the mouse to the revealed content.  As soon as the mouse leaves the inline citation that triggered the reveal, the sidenote is hidden again.  Conceptually, the solution to the problem lies in determining the users intention when the mouse leaves the hover trigger.[[]]  If the user intends to explore the revealed content (that is, by moving their mouse in the direction of the content), then content should remain visible.  If, however, the user continues reading (by moving their mouse anywhere but towards the revealed content), then it should fade out like normal.  The mechanics of implementing such actions are, unfortunately, somewhat complex.  My solution involves continually calculating the angle between two vectors: the first vector is one that represents the direction of mouse movement (that is, the vector between two locations of the mouse over time, and the second vector is simply the vector pointing from the hover trigger to the center of the revealed content.  Deciding whether the user is moving towards or away the revealed content is therefore a matter of continually checking if the calculated angle is under a certain threshold.  In practice, the refined hover controls look something like this.

Interactive Aesthetic
---------------------

The purpose of allowing the user to explore the revealed content was, in this case, to allow them to zoom in on the artwork.  The traditional method to allow such interaction is to use a Lightbox[[]] script.  I'll be frank: I'm not a big fan of Lightbox.  For one, opening and closing each Lightbox requires two separate clicks in different corners of the screen--in the middle of reading an essay.  Perhaps more importantly, I don't think the interaction design fits aesthetically with this particular use case.  What do I mean by interactive aesthetic[[]]?  Much as visual designs aim to have a unified aesthetic which grounds them in a certain style and form, interaction designs too harbor similar styles.  A topical example is the interactive aesthetic of iOS 7[[]] which aims to convey a sense of depth and spatiality through the physics of transitions and the layering of screens over each other.  In the case of the art essay at hand, however, I felt that the interactive aesthetic should be almost the opposite.  Rather than creating a separate Lightbox layer over the top of the article which would create a sense of 3D space and introduce the concept of modal windows, I wanted to emphasize the fact that this essay was originally just a 2D print article.  I chose therefore, to allow art zooming by way of a natural scaling motion which didn't introduce any extraneous modal windows, and pushed aside the main article rather than overlapping it (again, I wanted to emphasize the 2D nature of this webpage).  In keeping with the minimalism of the page design, I added a subtle opacity reduction in the article as the user scaled up the artwork.  Moreover, I tied the scaling action to the horizontal position of the user's mouse over the image.  Doing so allowed me to reduce the number of clicks necessary to zoom in on the artwork, and added a naturalness and ease to the flow of movement necessary to highlight a figure and explore it.

Further work
------------

A large amount of work on this design of sidenotes still remains.  In particular, the demo page is neither responsive nor compatible with mobile devices.

One last note
-------------

It is important to note that my goal for this project was more to explore and experiment with novel interactions than to make any overreaching claims about designing text for the web.  In addition, a concept as vaguely defined as interactive aesthetics is far from a guiding rule, but it is a useful conceptual framework to keep in mind when considering how web interactions contribute to a unified whole.